

1. What is full meaning of SQL

SQL - Structured Query Language. 

It is a language for managing and manipulating relational databases. SQL is used for querying, inserting, updating, and deleting data, and also managing database structures like tables and indexes.






2. List and explain four SQL Data Types

---- INT (Integer)
This is used to store whole numbers either positive, negative, or zero.
Example: age INT stores the age of a person and can be equal to 30.


---- VARCHAR (Variable Character)
This is used to store variable length strings. The maximum length is specified during the table creation.
Example: name VARCHAR(50) can store a string up to 50 characters


---- DATE
Date is used to store date values in the format YYYY-MM-DD (e.g., 1995-11-26).
Example: birth_date DATE stores a person's birth date.


---- DECIMAL (or NUMERIC)
This is used to store exact numeric values with a specified number of digits before and after the decimal point. Example: price DECIMAL(10, 2) stores values like 99999.99 (with 2 decimal places).






3. List and explain any three agregate functions that you know

---- COUNT()

Function COUNT() will returns the number of rows that match a specified condition. It counts all rows, including those with NULL values.33
Example: SELECT COUNT(*) FROM employees; — It will count the total number of rows in the "employees" table.

---- SUM()
This is used to calculates the total sum of a numeric column.
Example: SELECT SUM(salary) FROM employees WHERE department_id = 3; — The total salary of employees in department 3 will be returned

---- AVG()
Whenever AVG() is used, this will returns the average values.
Example: SELECT AVG(salary) FROM employees; — Returns the average salary of all employees.






4. There are various categories of SQL commands available under structured query language. List and explain in detail all the categories with at least 2 examples


---- Data Query Language (DQL)

This deals with querying the database to retrieve data. The most commonly used command in DQL is the SELECT statement.

Examples:
SELECT * FROM employees; — It will retrieves all columns and rows from the "employees" table.
SELECT name, salary FROM employees WHERE department = 'SQI'; — This will retrieve the name and salary of employees working in the SQI department


---- Data Manipulation Language (DML)
It is used for inserting, updating, or deleting data, basically to manipulate data inside tables.

Examples:
INSERT INTO employees (id, name, salary) VALUES (1, 'Oluwatosin', 50000); — Inserts a new employee record.
UPDATE employees SET salary = 60000 WHERE id = 1; — Updates the salary of the employee with ID 1.